# Job Description

## Director, National Accounts Receivables

**Department:** Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC)
**Location:** Gatineau, Quebec
**Position Number:** 64545

### General Accountability

The Director, National Accounts Receivables, is accountable for:

*   Establishing the Directorate as the Centre of Expertise in the Department on accounts receivable operations for overpayment reimbursements for the Department's programs including Labour Programs, Employment Insurance, CCP, OAS, Canada Student Loans, Grants and Contributions Programs, salary overpayments and revenue collection for Passport and Temporary Foreign Workers Programs.
*   Directing the development, enhancement and implementation of the policy framework governing the work.
*   Providing guidance and advice to Directorate staff to resolve complex problems that arise across the full spectrum of ESDC national accounts receivable operations and revenue collection, and oversight to ensure that reimbursements and revenues are processed accurately, in a timely manner, and in accordance with all central agency guidelines.
*   Providing oversight to ensure that year end processes are properly performed and that accounts receivable and revenue data is entered into the Departmental Financial Management System (DFMS) correctly.
*   Directing the development and enhancements of policies and procedures to address any issues that results from audits of the Directorate s activities and ensuring any new or enhanced procedures and policies adhere to central agency and auditor requirements.
*   Providing executive leadership to projects and pilot tests of innovative solutions that improve and evolve operations to take advantage of new technology, as well as the implementation of new techniques and methodologies to improve services provided both within the Department as well as to the Canadian public.
*   The accuracy of financial information, the integrity of overpayment recovery operations, and accurate statements of accounts for Canadians generated by the financial system.
*   Coordinating collection activity by CRA, and verifying the accuracy of information on amounts paid that CRA has entered in the financial system, identifying and rectifying errors with CRA.
*   Directing daily overpayment reconciliations and issuance of monthly statements of accounts.
*   The Director is also responsible for developing, testing and implementing an accounts receivable monitoring strategy for G&C program areas to ensure prompt handling of G&C overpayments, as well as leading working groups on collection of salary overpayments resulting from Phoenix inaccuracies.

### Director, Accounts Receivable Operations Quebec and Atlantic Canada (staff of 30) responsible for:

*   Directing the implementation of the framework for accounts receivable operations for overpayment reimbursements for Employment Insurance (El) for Quebec and Eastern/Atlantic Canada.
*   Directing the establishment of overpayments for El, including sending of requests for collection of overpayments to CRA for their action, and inputting of information into the accounts receivable system.
*   Directing the implementation of rigorous accounting protocols and procedures to ensure the accuracy of financial information, the integrity of overpayment recovery operations, and accurate statements of accounts for Canadians generated by the financial system.
*   Coordinating collection activity by CRA, and verifying the accuracy of information on amounts paid that CRA has entered in the financial system, identifying and rectifying errors with CRA.
*   Directing daily overpayment reconciliations and issuance of monthly statements of accounts.
*   The Director is also the lead for the Passport Modernization Initiative, a two year project which will close all thirty-four (34) Passport Offices across the country.

### Nature and Scope

Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) is the Department of the Government of Canada responsible for developing, managing and delivering social programs and services. It is one of the largest and most complex federal departments. It employs over 24,000 people and its activities account for almost one out of every three dollars spent by the federal government. The ESDC Portfolio (encompassing the Department, Labour Program and Service Canada) operates within a highly matrixed governance structure and operating model, supporting four Ministers (i.e. Minister of Families, Children and Social Development: Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Labour; Minister of Public Services, Procurement and Accessibility; and Minister of Seniors). Portfolio organizations operate with five (5) distinct sources of funding the Consolidated Revenue Fund, the Employment Insurance Operating Account, the Canada Pension Base Account, the Canada Pension Additional Account, and the Passport Revolving Fund, and deliver a large number of diverse programs to Canadians. Overall Portfolio expenditures are projected to be $138.3 Billion in FY 2019-20. ESDC has a broad mandate that includes social policies and programs, including Labour, and the delivery of a range of programs and services that affect Canadians throughout their lives. For example, the Department provides seniors with basic income security, supports unemployed workers, helps students finance their post-secondary education, and assists parents who are raising young children. The Labour Program contributes to social and economic well-being by fostering safe, healthy, fair and inclusive work environments and cooperative workplace relations in the federal jurisdiction. Service Canada helps citizens access ESDC's programs, as well as other Government of Canada programs and services. Additionally, ESDC now has legislative authority to deliver services on behalf of other government departments (OGDs) and external organizations, with ensuing cost recovery agreements.

This transition and the subsequent increase in complexity necessitates the evaluation and reoptimization of existing service strategies and plans, as well as financial management processes to accommodate this scale up in responsibility, while maintaining a high service standard and prudent financial stewardship. The ICAAD Directorate of the CFO Branch is responsible for ensuring adherence to general accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for all 4 sets of financial statements, providing departmental accounts payable and receivable operations, grants and contributions financial monitoring, relocation, proactive disclosure and accounting operations services, as well as the development of departmental financial policies and internal control frameworks, and associated processes and procedures. Within this highly complex environment, the Director, National Accounts Receivables, establishes the Directorate as the Centre of Expertise in the Department on national accounts receivable operations, including overpayment reimbursements for the Department's programs including Labour Programs, Employment Insurance, CCP, OAS, Canada Student Loans, Grants and Contributions Programs, salary overpayments and revenue collection for Passport and Temporary Foreign Workers Programs. The Director directs the development and implementation of the framework for accounts receivable operations including all policies, procedures, systems and tools governing the work.

The Director provides leadership to the development and implementation of strategic, business, financial and human resources plans for the Directorate of 126 FTEs located both in Headquarters and across the country. The Director provides expert advice and guidance to the Director General, ICAAD and the CFO on all national accounts receivable issues.

There are several challenges for the position. ESDC is a very large department with a considerable amount that distributes large sums of money through a wide variety of essential programs and services. The nature of overpayment recovery for ESDC programs necessitates close coordination with CRA. The evolution of the accounts receivable system and databases is essential to the agoing success of ESDC collection activity. However, the systems and databases are not currently integrated which hampers collection activity. For example, the legacy systems that store data for CPP and OAS operate on older software that must be modernized to ensure compatibility with the newer system. This interaction between legacy and modern systems necessitates a patchwork of manual workarounds that negatively impact productivity. This environment represents a significant challenge for the position: as the lead on the evolution of accounts receivable systems for ESDC programs, Phoenix overpays, and ESDC G&Cs, the Director must drive change in programs across the Department from a collections perspective which is contrary to their core priority of distribution. Additionally, the Director is challenged to spur innovation and think outside the box in the adoption of leading edge technology (such as Al) to further ease Directorate workload, increase efficiency, and improve collection activities. Service Canada’s programs represent the largest outlay of the government for social services, which has contributed to the relative complexity of its financial management operations.

The position is a member of the ICAAD Management Committee, meets with the COE of SAP weekly to resolve systems development/enhancement issues, and represents ESDC with CRA on a regular basis to resolve highly complex and sensitive issues related to their roles and responsibilities for collections on ESDC’s behalf.

### Dimensions (2020-21)

*   **Direct FTEs:** 126
*   **Salaries and O&M:** $7 Million
*   **ESDC Accounts Receivable:** $6 Billion (expected to increase to $10B with impacts from pandemic)

### Specific Accountabilities

1.  Establishes the Directorate as the Centre of Expertise in the Department on the national accounts receivable operations including overpayment recovery and revenue collection. Directs the development and implementation of the framework for national accounts receivable operations; builds collaborative relations with program leads in ESDC; builds partnerships and coordinates operations with CRA; and builds collaborative relations with PSPC on providing internal control compliance assurance.
2.  Leads the management and evolution of ESDC’s accounts receivable system and the generation of timely and accurate statements of account to Canadians. Provides senior executive leadership to teams engaged in daily bank reconciliations, and the analysis of CRA system information to identify and rectify anomalies to ensure that payments by Canadians are allocated to the proper debt.
3.  Provides executive leadership to major projects, (such as Passport Modernization) and major transformation initiatives requiring research into new technology, and development and prototyping of innovative technologies (for example, Robotic Automation, Al) that can be deployed to improve service and reduce costs.
4.  Provides executive oversight to the ongoing evolution of the Department's accounts receivable system. Works closely with the program heads and provides leadership to foster understanding of the legislative requirements of their programs.
