# Job Description

## Director, Central Operations

**Agency:** Passport Office
**Division:** Central Operations
**Classification:** EX-I
**Position Number:** PASS-O3I4O
**Effective Date:** April 1, 2000

### General Accountability

The Director, Central Operations, is responsible for the issuance of passports and related services in the National Capital Region and surrounding areas to individuals applying for a passport by mail from Canada and the United States. The incumbent will also provide special passport-related documentation services and provide relevant policies to federal and provincial government representatives who must travel on government business, specific to refugee travel documents and certificates of identity. The incumbent will provide national mail and administrative services on behalf of the Passport Office, manage these services on a cost-recovery basis and in accordance with modern management practices, ensure the protection and security of information, manage Passport Office staff and passports, and participate in the overall management of the Passport Office as a member of the Executive Committee. He or she must also design, develop, manage and evaluate pilot projects, represent the Passport Office at interdepartmental, intergovernmental and international meetings, seminars and conferences and with working groups, and in particular establish and maintain links and good relations with senior officials of foreign passport issuing authorities, particularly in the United States, Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.

### Organizational Structure

The Manager, Identity Certificates, is responsible for the management of services related to identity certificates and refugee travel documents. The Manager, Public Services, Hull, is responsible for the management and delivery of passport services to applicants in the Hull area and to those applying through the offices of Members of Parliament and the Senate or the call centre in Hull. The incumbent also coordinates emergency and after-hours passport services. The Manager, Ottawa Office, is responsible for the management of passport services for applicants in the Ottawa area. The Manager, Mail Services, is responsible for the provision of mail and courier services to Central Operations and Passport Office headquarters to ensure the timely issuance of passports; the incumbent also administers the Passport Office's mail system. The Administrative Officer is responsible for the management of the Directorate's administrative services.

### Nature and Scope

The Canadian Passport Office is a decentralized organization located in the National Capital Region with regional offices in Eastern, Central and Western Canada. Since 1990, the Passport Office has been a Special Operating Agency. As such, and thanks to the revolving fund, it has greater management and operational latitude, but it must also cover its operating expenses as much as possible. The Passport Office must issue authoritative travel documents to Canadians. These documents must conform to international standards and requirements and their validity must be recognized in all countries. However, even if the government's intention is not to unnecessarily restrict the freedom of movement of Canadians, there is no automatic right to a passport or other travel document. Rather, this is a privilege.

The Director, Central Operations, is responsible for issuing diplomatic and special passports to various federal and provincial Canadian officials who must travel abroad on behalf of the Government of Canada. These passports are particularly prized because they confer on the holder various special privileges ranging from diplomatic immunity to the treatment reserved for officials by foreign customs and passport control officials. Consequently, these passports are in great demand. There are strict guidelines regarding the status of officials who may hold such a passport. The Director, Central Operations is responsible for developing policies and eligibility criteria for these passports. However, despite the rules, there is considerable pressure from various government circles to obtain higher-level passports. The Director must ensure that the applicant's status authorizes him or her to hold the appropriate level of passport and must be prepared to defend this decision, despite being under enormous pressure, including political pressure. In some cases, the Director may make a recommendation for an exception to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

### Specific Accountabilities

1.  Design, implement and maintain various security measures for the protection of information and passports, including the security clearances of staff members and their own physical security, the periodic assessment of these measures and the necessary modifications to be made to them.
2.  Intervene personally in cases of delay in the issuance of passports or of refusal of a passport when applicants request a review, or upon receipt of representations made by others on behalf of applicants, such as Members of Parliament, to ensure that the refusal is justified, or use discretionary powers to issue passports for humanitarian or other reasons and carry out risk assessments of illegal acts or illegal use of the passport.
3.  Liaise with the Consular Services of Canadian missions abroad to assist Canadian travellers whose passports have been lost or stolen and to validate the information provided by them for urgent replacements.
4.  Establish and maintain good relations with other federal and provincial organizations and the private sector to encourage and facilitate the exchange of information, the validation of documents and their relevance, as well as with law enforcement agencies in cases of theft, fraud, misrepresentation or other illegal acts committed by applicants or passport holders or of major security breaches.
5.  Represent the Passport Office at various interdepartmental, intergovernmental and international meetings, conferences and working groups to agree on issues such as the facilitation of passport control, risk assessment, the use of new technologies or other measures to facilitate the management of passport control, contain costs and protect the integrity of the system.
