# Job Description

## Director, Planning, Results and Risk Management

**Division:** Planning, Results and Risk Management
**Directorate:** Strategic Integration, Planning, and Accountability
**Classification:** EX-I

### General Accountability

The Director, Planning, Results and Risk Management is accountable for the development, coordination, and integrated management of the Branch’s planning, performance and risk management frameworks and strategies and advice to Branch senior management on these; the coordination and development of comprehensive Branch business plans; developing and coordinating the Branch’s input on central agencies, Cabinet, and parliamentary reports and documents, and coordinated Branch responses to a variety of other reports, such as reports on official languages, internal audit reports, and reports by the Office of the Auditor General of Canada. The Director works closely on a cooperative basis with the Department's corporate management and with Service Canada in areas of mutual interests and interdependence, and assists in promoting effective Branch management strategies and Branch culture.

### Organizational Structure

The Director, Planning, Results and Risk Management is one of three reporting to the Director General, Strategic Integration, Planning, and Accountability. The other two are the Director, Grant, Contribution Policies, Branch Culture and Corporate Relations, and the Director, Strategic Integration. The organization managed by the Director is a matrix organization consisting of 15 FTEs with Senior Managers and 2 Project Managers. This team is responsible for the following broad functions: the development and implementation of a) Branch-wide performance measurement framework, the risk management strategy and activities, the production of the Branch business plans, Branch contributions to key departmental planning and accountability frameworks and documents (RPP, DPR, etc.).

### Nature and Scope

The mission of HRSDC is to build a stronger and more competitive Canada, to support Canadians in making choices that enable them to live productive and rewarding lives, and to improve Canadians’ quality of life. To do this, HRSDC develops policies that promote a society in which all Canadians can use their talents, skills and resources to participate in learning, work, and their community. HRSDC creates programs and support initiatives that help Canadians move through life’s transitions by creating better outcomes for Canadians through service excellence with Service Canada and other partners.

Within HRSDC, the mandate of the Social Development Sector Branch (SDSB) is to conduct research and develop policies, programs, and services aimed at children, seniors, person with disabilities, families and communities. Specifically, the Branch program responsibilities include the Canada Pension Plan, Old Age Security, New Horizons program, Office for Disability Issues, Opportunities Fund for Person with Disabilities and the Social Development Partnerships program.

The Strategic Integration, Planning, and Accountability Directorate provides management support and assistance to the Assistant Deputy Minister, managers and staff in the proper functioning of the Branch. The Directorate is responsible for the development and management of the Branch’s strategic planning framework and processes; performance measurement indicators and reports; the risk assessment framework; horizontal management of the Branch’s grants and contribution programs to align all with government policies, and integrate grants and contributions into the Branch’s planning framework; revitalization and cultural transformation of the Branch’s human resource management approach, advice and responsibilities on change management and transformation; the development of analytical frameworks for the coordination and integration of strategic Branch plans; and Branch liaison, representation and coordination with corporate Management on planning, accommodation, IM/IT and program integrity, evaluation, and audit.

The primary responsibilities of the Director, Planning, Results and Risk Management are to coordinate the Branch’s planning requirements with those of the Department and the Branch’s portion of the departmental planning requirements to TBS and the Branch input into the Reports on Priorities and Planning, Department Performance Reports, Branch input to departmental responses to the Management Accountability Framework assessment reports, Memoranda to Cabinet submissions, and Branch components to other related reports, such as reports on official languages, and response to reports by the Department’s internal audit and the Office of the Auditor General.

The Director establishes and maintains cooperative relationships between the Branch and Service Canada (SC). As Service Canada is largely responsible for program delivery, its review of the proposed business plan and its input are essential. Consequently, agreement needs to be reached with respect to their program delivery capabilities, particularly if new or expanded programs are anticipated that impact on their delivery resources and associated costs. It is essential for the Director to gain an understanding of SC business plan processes, including limiting factors, and ensure that the Branch’s business plan is realistic in terms of Service Canada’s capabilities. The Director also ensures that the Branch business plan is integrated with HRSDC corporate plans and priorities. This involves the Director in ongoing discussions with corporate officials.

The Director is an active participant in the various fora for business plan discussion, acceptance of various proposals for adjustments, and other aspects of the Branch planning process. During the course of the year, the Director periodically reviews the approved plan to identify deviations or other unanticipated change requirements. This may come about through a variety of different factors, such as changes in government priorities, new legislative enactments, legal issues, or other causes that could not be considered in advance. As such changes may alter or invalidate parts of the existing business plan, the Director oversees the plan’s updating. Updating also requires changes to output and risk assumptions, and other aspects of the plan, to ensure that any performance assessments arising out of the plan reflect new program realities.

The Director is accountable for the establishment of a multi-year performance framework and measurement system and the integration and management of this framework and system into the Branch’s planning processes and various business cycles. The Director oversees the development of various performance reports.

### Specific Accountability

*   Coordinates and produces the Branch input for the departmental planning requirements to TBS and the Branch input into the Reports on Priorities and Planning, Department Performance Reports, Branch input to departmental responses to the Management Accountability Framework assessment reports, Memoranda to Cabinet submissions, and Branch components to other related reports, such as reports on official languages, and response to reports by the Department’s internal audit and the Office of the Auditor General.
*   Develops the Branch evidence-based business plan through the analysis of government, departmental and branch priorities from various types of information, such as databases, research, published reports, and other relevant information bases.
*   Oversees, directs, and coordinates the conduct of environmental scans including political and social developments that impact on the Branch’s business lines, to assess their impact on a continuing basis and provides information to the Director General and senior Branch management on findings with recommendations.
*   Establishes and maintains cooperative working relationships with Service Canada as the Branch’s principal service delivery arm, and develops and maintains joint work undertakings with respect to performance reporting and other issues, particularly when policy and legislative initiatives impact on service delivery.
*   Oversees all audit and evaluation activities in the Branch and liaises with the audit and evaluation functions of HRSDC and Service Canada, conducts annual planning exercises with audit and evaluation officials and serves on steering committees for specific audit and evaluation studies.
*   Directs the horizontal integration of performance measurement, risk measurement, program evaluation and internal audit into a comprehensive system, involving the development of a multi-year performance measurement and reporting system within the Branch; feedback on the effectiveness and utility of this system.
*   Oversees the collection and monitors data acquisition forming the backbone of risk assessment, risk mitigation strategies, and risk Management reports.
*   Coordinates and facilitates various fora to influence and support input into Branch management decision-making processes and participate in promoting the Branch’s culture.
